---
oip: 2
title: Witness staking methods and amount
author: metav
created: 2023-10-20
---

**OORT Witness Staking Proposal:**

The Olympus protocol, Oort’s mainnet consensus, will utilize Proof of Stake (PoS) where blocks are confirmed by Witnesses (validators) who are required to stake a specified amount of Oort tokens in order to participate. The objective of this proposal is to ascertain the requisite number of tokens an account must stake to qualify as a Witness.

****Participation Requirements****

To be eligible as a Witness, a staking pool holding a total of **500,000** Oort tokens must be established.  

The creator of the pool is required to directly stake **200,000** Oort tokens from their Ale wallet, with the community collectively contributing the outstanding **300,000** tokens remaining. 

Interested community members can participate in the Witness pool of their choice by staking a  minimum **1000** tokens.

****Operational Cycle****

The operational cycle, or 'epoch', is the interval for selecting block validators from the Witness pool. Witnesses alternate as block validators during these cycles. Those serving as validators in a current cycle are known as "Active Witnesses". An epoch spans 10000 MCIs (a specific time metric in the Olympus protocol), typically lasting between 60 and 120 minutes.

****Setup Witness Pool****

Creating a Witness Pool requires the setup of an Oort validator node by an account. To ensure receive 100% staking rewards, the validator node needs to function both effectively and reliably. The suggested hardware setup for running a validator node includes an **8-core CPU, 32GB of RAM, a 2TB SSD, and a network capacity of 100MB for inbound and outbound traffic**.

Follow the instruction https://github.com/oort-tech/Olympus#readme on how to setup a Oort validator node, and how the create a witness pool.

****Staking Commitment****

The creator of the Witness Pool has the ability to set a "commission rate" for their pool. This commission is deducted from the rewards generated by community members who participate in staking. The purpose of setting this commission rate is to offset the hardware and network costs incurred by the creator for setting up the pool.

Unstaking is permissible at any point until a pool has reached capacity and the Witness Pool is activated. Once a pool has been activated, the Witness will undergo a  **300 epoch (about two weeks)** lock-up window before they can initiate an exit.

****Profit Distribution****

The staking returns are subject to the Oort tokenomics and range between 10% and 15% annually.
